---
title: "Finding Principle"
date: "2019-09-21"
---

>"As the time is short, I will leave out all the flattery...Let us consider the way in which we spend our lives." 
>~Henry David Thoreau

<p>I have had a very hard time answering this question throughout my life. When I was very little my parents asked, "What do you want to be when you grow up?"  I am sure I had a very cute answer that included an illustrious career. Then in kindergarten there was an entire day dedicated to my classmates and I presenting what we were going to be.  "Fireman!" was my reply.  Next, in grade school and thanks to Dr. Henry Walton Jones Jr, also known as "Indiana," I spent my days dreaming of being an archaeologist unearthing long forgotten civilizations and puzzling over the why and how of where they went.  So when I was a senior in high school, my guidance counselor asked me this question again and for fear of being embarrassed for not having an answer I blurted out, "businessman." Seriously, just said it. I did not know what people who were in business actually did, but I knew they wore suits and most of my fellow classmates said they were going into business. I assumed I was in good company.</p>

<p>Fast forward to day one of my macroeconomics class. First semester of college.  Topics include how levels of income and production and the rates of inflation and unemployment are determined, consider how economic activity is affected by the federal government’s taxing and spending policies and by the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy practices...  Seriously? Businessman? </p>

<p>Email from College Advisor's Office:
Dear Mr. Tardif,
With only one week remaining before the end of your sophomore year, you must declare a major in order to meet graduation requirements within four years. Please complete this before Friday.  

Hmmmmm. What to be, what to be?  With a few days of deliberation and nothing coming to mind, I ended up selecting English as a major with a minor in communications. I can read, study literature, and write. Perfect. My path was set.</p>

<p>These decisions ultimately led to 9 years of teaching high school English.  I loved the work. It was difficult, challenging, and rewarding, but I knew I could not do it forever. Building relationships with teenagers while persuading them to read and write about literature was not how I wanted to spend the remainder of my professional career. </p>

<p>In 2011 with 6 years into my teaching career, I moved to Denver, CO. A fresh start in a new city was going to be the deciding factor in whether to cut the cord on my teaching career. I remember sitting in my classroom after a challenging period and checking my email. I came across a headline stating "Learn Ruby on Rails." I was beginning to get more intrigued in web development as one of my former colleagues had shown me how HTML and CSS worked a few years previous. I spent about 15 minutes walking through Codecadamy's tutorials. After a few minutes completing what felt like disjointed exercises and not really understanding what I was doing, I closed the browser.</p>

<p>Three years later, I found myself moving out of the classroom and into an admin role working for the central office in Denver Public Schools.  The tech bug kept poking its head out into my work as an assessment coordinator. I remember overhearing a colleague mention "Dreamweaver" and my interest was peaked.  It sounded really enticing to be able to create websites using software without knowing code.  It wasn't. Dreamweaver never sparked my interest other than being a cool word. Eventually, I maintained parts of our departments WordPress site and learned about plugins, but it was not until I worked closely with our software developer, Justin, to walk him through some business logic for an application that the spark turned into a tiny mini-flame.</p>

<p>Justin showed me C# which I could not wrap my brain around at this time and SQL. With the assessment work I was already doing, SQL immediately pulled me in.  I loved how declarative it was and non-arbitrary.  It was the first time I was able to look at code and truly understand what it was trying to do.  Now, I am talking some simple select queries, but the more I worked with Justin to improve the application the more complex the queries became with joins, unions, subqueries, and the ins and outs of how relational databases worked. We were then discussing performance issues and I started to develop a new appreciate for software, applications, and code, but I still did not think it was something I wanted to do.</p>

<p>A few weeks later, I needed a report created, but no one in the department had the time to do it. Enter Pete the programmer.  Stealing time between my main work, I hacked together some queries utilzing a MS Access database and many conversations with anyone in the department I could wrangle a few minutes from. Two weeks later I had a functioning report that helped schools audit which students still needed literacy plans. This report decreased the number of outstanding plans down to 6-7%. </p>

<p>This was the moment that I realized technology and writing code was in my future.  I was not sure how I would get there, but it was the moment that I felt I could finally answer the question.  I wanted to make people's lives better utilizing code to solve problems. Now how to get there.</p>

<p>Over the next two years, I tried to incorporate technology and code into all aspects of my work. I transitioned to an assessment specialist where I was writing high school language arts assessments while also training district staff on utilizing a software as a service for assessment and data. I loved this work and it was pretty interesting. Part of this work had me trying to find articles, literature, and poetry to include in assessments.  Since our district budget was getting slashed at this time, we had very little extra money to pay to use more modern writing.  This led to the public domain and an article titled "Life Without Principle" by Henry David Thoreau.  My previous experience with Thoreau was in Mr. O'Malley's junior year English course in high school and reading _Walden_. A man lives in the woods and writes about his experience was the sorriest thing I had ever heard of at the time. This second experience with Throeau was quite the opposite.  I loved the article as I was much older, more mature, and in a place in my life where I was trying to more purpose. Thoreau writes, "Most men would feel insulted if it were proposed to employ them in throwing stones over a wall, and then in throwing them back, merely that they might earn their wages."  I was floored.  How long have I been throwing stones over the wall to put money in my pocket? </p>

<p>Enough as enough. I put a plan in place. I signed up for a course on Udemy to learn SQL. This was great as I continued to use SQL within my work in pulling data for schools, but it as not enough. I moved onto  Colt Steele's web development bootcamp course. This was fascinating and I started to create my own application, but I could never hold myself accountable enough.  I was learning at a slow rate and typically only a night or two a week after putting the kids to bed and spending time with my wife. On my 45-60 minute commute home from work, I listened to technology podcasts to learn the language and stay up-to-date on tech terms/topics.   </p>

<p>To be continued...</p>